## Elevating the profile of medical image perception research

Elevating the profile of medical image perception research within the broader medical and scientific communities (e.g., government agencies, industry, advocacy groups, journal editors, review panels, study sections) is essential to ensure a sustainable future for this important research endeavor.
Here we identify key essential elements for achieving this goal (see Table @tbl:profile).

Creating a network of invested stakeholders (e.g., clinicians, academia, biomedical informatics, government and regulatory agencies, medical centers, industry, conferences) is critical to support an awareness program promoting education, collaboration, and research.
Clinician advocates are needed to lend visibility and credibility to perception research, and to highlight its importance to the medical community.
This is important not just to facilitate the research itself, but also to encourage adoption and implementation of research-based solutions to clinician challenges.
Potential models for this network include the National Collaborative on Childhood Obesity Research (NCCOR) and the Alliance for Digital Pathology (ADP).
NCCOR is a partnership between federal government agencies (NIH, USDA, and CDC) and the non-profit Robert Wood Johnson Foundation.
NCCOR provides infrastructure and resources to promote collaborative research and supports an outreach program to educate the community on successful collaborations that are fighting childhood obesity.
The Alliance for Digital Pathology is a regulatory science initiative that brings together clinicians, researchers, government, and industry to identity key aims to advance digital pathology and provide an infrastructure for collaborative projects.

Outreach efforts at conferences are needed to engage and inform the communities.
Symposiums should be held at clinician conferences, such as the ASCP and RSNA, to educate clinicians on how the science of cognition and perception can inform their work, and to highlight research findings that have produced positive changes in clinical practice.
Perception researchers could create a model "reading room of the future" at conferences and invite clinicians to different workstations that promote research outcomes.
Symposiums and workshops on medical image perception should be held at cognition and perception conferences (e.g., Psychonomic Society, Vision Sciences Society).
As a model, consider the outreach efforts conducted by The International Society for Optics and Photonics (SPIE) to educate researchers on the clinician's perspective and challenges, such as organizing demonstrations of clinicians interpreting images to allow researchers to learn how clinicians read [JMW: reference?].

Clinicians should be given training in fundamental concepts of cognition and perception, as they pertain to diagnostic performance in clinical practice.
This training should be included in the noninterpretive skills section of the American Board of Radiology (ABR) Core and Certifying examination.
Similar to the educational module for CME credit (see *Enabling Collaborative Transdisciplinary Research* section), fundamental topics should include: classification of visual search errors, development of global processing, attentional mechanisms related to clinical practice, and classic perceptual and interpretive errors.
It would also be a good idea to revive the practice of providing training in the basics of medical image perception for panelists on NIH study sections tasked with reviewing research proposals on the topic.

Medical image research would benefit from a more robust presence in the published literature.
While here are specialty journals that routinely publish the results of medical image perception research, publication of such research in high-impact radiology and pathology journals is uneven.
Some of this may be the result of a lack of editorial infrastructure (e.g. the absence of associate editors with expertise in the area makes it harder to obtain reliable peer review of submissions).
The basic perceptual and cognitive literature would be enriched by review and opinion pieces by clinicians describing the perceptual and cognitive questions that arise in clinical work.
Similarly, it would be helpful to have reviews of the relevant perceptual and cognitive literature in widely-read clinical journals.


| Ways to Elevate Medical Image Cognition and Perception's Profile Within the Medical Image Community|
|:----------|
| 1.  Create a network of invested stakeholders (e.g., clinicians, academia, biomedical informatics, government and regulatory agencies, medical centers, industry) to support an awareness program promoting education, collaboration, and research.|
| 2.  Outreach.<br> -   Educate clinicians about cognition and perception.<br> -   Educate cognition and perception researchers about the clinician's perspective.<br> -   Add outreach (e.g., model "reading room of the future") to pop-up perception labs at national conferences.<br>     -   Reading room of the future|
| 3.  Educational Training.<br> -   Trainings on cognitive and perceptual fundamentals as "noninterpretive skills".<br> -   Trainings for study sections.|
| 4.  Publish review and opinion pieces by clinicians in basic research journals and by researchers in clinical journals.<br> - Publish research in special issues in medical journals to ensure credibility and visibility among clinicians.|

Table: Medical Image Cognition and Perception's Profile
{#tbl:profile}
